# New Model Army artillery train establishments

Notes and references about plans for the New Model Army's artillery train.

## Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Original documents](#original-documents)
- [Establishment figures](#establishment-figures)
- [Other information](#other-information)
	- [Siting field guns](#siting-field-guns)
	- [Cartridges](#cartridges)
	- [Gunners and matrosses](#gunners-and-matrosses)
	- [Pioneers](#pioneers)
- [References](#references)


## Introduction

The New Model Army was not necessarily the first army to be planned, but the process of planning is particularly well documented. Most of the planning was done by various parliamentary committees. Sir Thomas Fairfax was only responsible for selecting the officers. Much of the detailed planning was done by the Army Committee, chaired by Robert Scawen and usually reckoned to be dominated by the Independent faction. Scawen's committee drew up a list of all the guns, ammunition, vehicles, horses, personnel, tools, and other materials that would be needed by the artillery train. The Committee for Taking Accounts for the Whole Kingdom, usually reckoned to be dominated by the Presbyterian faction, objected to the Army Committee's list and produced its own lower estimate. Although the Accounts Committee claimed that many things in Scawen's list were unnecessary, it may have been more concerned with saving money, or even with derailing the Independents' new-modelling project, than with building an effective army.

## Original documents

The following documents about the artillery train resulted from this process:

- TNA, SP 28/145, ff. 60-64: Army Committee's list for the higher establishment, annotated with objections in a different hand. Some of these annotations give alternative figures that match the Accounts Committee's list. The Army Committee's list is followed by free text explaining some of the decisions. Under this (f. 63v) is written, 'Read and assented unto Marcii 5o 1644[/5]'. The back page (f. 64v) is annotated, 'Mr Scawens Traine of Artillery w[i]th the reasons of [th]e difference'.
- TNA, SP 28/144/10, ff. 238-239: an alternative lower estimate for the artillery train by the Accounts Committee. (f. 237 is an establishment for the whole army which may be slightly different from the one actually used. It is a separate document from ff. 238-239.)
- An unfoliated volume of Accounts Committee papers (probably TNA, SP 28/255) includes another copy of the Accounts Committee's lower estimate for the artillery train and a list of reasons why they cannot agree with Scawen's estimate.

Parliament seems to have accepted the higher establishment. On 5 March 1645, the *Commons Journal* recorded, 'Mr. Scawen reports, from the Committee, the List of the Train of Artillery: The which was read; and, upon the Question, assented unto'.[^1] The following day, Scawen reported that 1,038 horses would be needed for the artillery train, and the Commons resolved that they would be supplied by county quotas.[^2] This became an ordinance on 14 March, with county quotas adding up to 1,056 horses.[^3] This is all consistent with the Army Committee's higher estimate, and not with the Accounts Committee's lower estimate. Records of raising the quota can be found in many boxes of county committee papers in [TNA, SP 28/219-251](https://discovery.nationalarchives.gov.uk/browse/r/h/C20476), usually combined with records of impressment of soldiers for the infantry.

## Establishment figures

| Item | Army Committee | Accounts Committee |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Demi-culverins | 4 | 4 |
| Long sakers | 6 | 2 |
| Ordinary sakers | 20 | 24 |
| 80 pound mortar | 1 | 1 |
| 12 pound mortar | 1 | 1 |
| Boats for bridge | 6 | 0 |
| Wagons and carts | 132 | 87 |
| Horses | 1,038 | 670 |

Apart from the mortars, this does not include any siege artillery. During the siege of Bristol in 1645, heavy artillery was sent by sea and landed at Lyme Regis, but Bristol was taken by storm before the artillery could be moved from Lyme to Bristol.[^4]

It is not certain whether the real artillery train exactly matched the establishment. These documents need to be compared with the procurement records of what was bought for and issued to the artillery.

## Other information

The objections and answers generated by the dispute give some unusual insights into how artillery was used, and how armies operated.

### Siting field guns

The Accounts Committee objected to 6 long sakers, saying, '2 is enough for the traine being to big for [?a?] regim[en]t'.[^5]

The Army Committee's reasons for its establishment included:

'Fourteene Gentlemen of the Ordinance are required for there must goe one with every Regiment to looke to the Gonnes, & two is as little as can stay in the Traine'.[^6]

'Without Baskett makers we can plant no Ordnance neere any towne or house, but they wilbe in danger to be dismounted and the Gonners slaine'.[^7]

'the Gonns perhapps planted in a day of service a myle from the Traine & Musquett [f. 63v] shott one from another in the heades of Regiment[es] & places of advantage'.[^8]

### Cartridges

'Foure Gonners Mates is as little as can be to helpe the Master Gonner that Cartridges & baggs of Powder & Shott be ready to be distributed by them, soe as none want upon a day of service'.[^9]

### Gunners and matrosses

'there must be two Gonners a peece to the bigger Ordnance and one to the lesser, or otherwise if either of the Gonners at the great Gonns should be slaine, the Gonns should then be out of service, the Matrosses generally being but Labourers & know little'.[^10]

'Lastly where it is sayd by the List given in to the Committee that the Gonners being few, they may be supplyed w[i]th Matrosses, but that cannot be well when as scarce one of 20 of them can load a peece, or at the best can doe no more then load her, what good can be expected from them in point of service with a pece'.[^11]

### Pioneers

'For Pyoneers 100, or 120 is as little as may be for making the wayes for the Gonnes & the Carriages with one part, the other to cutt the hedges that the foot and horse may march on both sides the Traine without retarding it by which meanes the march may be advanced 4 or 5 miles in a day. Former Lists having allowed some 400 & at the least 160 for upon a day of Battaile they cutt wayes & hedges, which we have found by experience to be of exceeding use'.[^12]

## References

[^1]: [British History Online: Commons Journal, volume 4, pp. 69-70](https://www.british-history.ac.uk/commons-jrnl/vol4/pp69-70).
[^2]: [British History Online: Commons Journal, volume 4, pp. 70-72](https://www.british-history.ac.uk/commons-jrnl/vol4/pp70-72).
[^3]: [British History Online: Acts and Ordinances, volume 1, pp. 653-655](https://www.british-history.ac.uk/no-series/acts-ordinances-interregnum/pp653-655).
[^4]: TNA, SP 28/202, f. 233.
[^5]: TNA, SP 28/145, f. 60r.
[^6]: TNA, SP 28/145, f. 62r.
[^7]: TNA, SP 28/145, f. 62v.
[^8]: TNA, SP 28/145, f. 63r-63v.
[^9]: TNA, SP 28/145, f. 62r.
[^10]: TNA, SP 28/145, f. 62v.
[^11]: TNA, SP 28/145, f. 63r.
[^12]: TNA, SP 28/145, f. 63r.
